# Architecture

*Vaporware warning: this document is as much of a roadmap, as a description of
what is currently implemented.*

 * A Noblit database is conceptually a set of [datoms](data-model.md).
 * Indexes facilitate queries, by storing the datoms in a particular order.
 * Indexes are [trees](htree.md). Tree nodes are stored in a *store*, and
   identified by a page id.
 * The value of a datom is stored externally, on the *heap*. The heap is a
   bump-pointer backing store for values, and values are identified by their
   offset in the heap.
 * As an optimization, small values can be stored inline in the datom.

## Immutability

Noblit is immutable on two levels:

 * Changing or deleting data is possible on a logical level, but these
   operations produce *new* datoms; datoms are immutable and they are never
   removed. Just like in Git you can delete and change files, but changes are
   recorded as new commits.
 * Index are implemented as persistent trees (referring to *persistent data
   structure*, not to *persistent storage*). A tree modification produces a *new*
   root node, that may reference nodes from the old tree, but nodes are immutable
   once created, and never updated in place.

Backing indexes by persistent trees enables consistent reads to happen in
parallel with writes. Once you have the root node of an index, that tree will
never change. Reads based on that root will always see the same tree, providing
consistency. Because the tree is immutable, parallel reads are safe, without the
need for coordination. Therefore, Noblit is very suitable for read-heavy
workloads.

The flip side of Noblitâ€™s approach to indexing is that writes need to be
serialized. A write first writes the new tree nodes, up to the new root. A
commit is an atomic swap of the tree root. Serializing writes provides the
serializable isolation level by construction, but it eliminates the possibility
to trade isolation for write throughput. Therefore, Noblit is unsuitable for
write-heavy workloads.

## Append-only

Noblit is append-only on two levels:

 * The database is conceptually a set of datoms, and the only supported
   operation is *insert*.
 * The nodes of the index trees are stored in a page store, and new nodes get a
   new page id. Noblit does not reuse ids of unreachable pages.

The current in-memory page store implementation is an append-only vector of
pages, where the page id is simply the index. The plan for the disk-backed page
store is similar: an append-only file of pages, that never reuses pages in the
middle.

Not reusing old pages for new tree nodes has one big advantage: caching becomes
trivial. If you have retrieved the page with a given id previously, then that
data will always be valid. This enables caching at all levels: caching disk data
in memory, but also caching remote data locally. No coordination is required for
caching either: everything is always safe to cache.

An append-only page store has the additional benefit that it makes it easy to
have a reproducible disk format, making Noblit databases suitable for use in
[reproducible builds](https://reproducible-builds.org/). How data ends up on
disk depends only on writes. If page ids were recycled, there would need to be
a coordination mechanism to determine which pages can be recycled safely, which
might make the output dependent on both reads and writes.

The downsides of an append-only page store are fragmentation and space use.
Eventually, tree nodes will become unreachable, but they still exist in the
index file, where they consume space, and form gaps between reachable nodes.

## Garbage collection

*Vaporware warning: garbage collection has not been implemented.*

The downsides of an append-only page store can be mitigated with a compacting
garbage colletion. Traverse the trees, and write all reachable nodes to a *new*
index file. In addition to dropping unreachable nodes, the tree nodes in the new
index file can be ordered such that a tree traversal becomes a sequential scan
through the index file, improving disk access patterns.
